Hans was not just any horse.
No, he was a horse that could ... read and count!
That's how it seemed to the world when his owner, Wilhelm van Osten, showed him to the world.
Wilhelm and his horse Hans lived more than a hundred years ago in Germany.
Wilhelm was a mathematics teacher.
He was a great lover of animals and believed that animals were just as smart as humans.
To prove this, he gave lessons to his horse.
So his horse "went to school" with him and learned to spell and do sums.
But that's not all.
Hans also received history and music lessons.
Wilhelm could make him add, subtract, do multiplication tables and fractions.
He even knew the days of the week and knew what time it was.
If someone asked Hans a question and the answer was "yes," Hans would nod his head.
If the answer was "no," he would tap his hoof on the ground.
Everyone was amazed when Hans gave the right answer time after time.
Before long, the two of them were performing all over Germany.
They didn't charge an entrance fee.
There was even a story about them in an American newspaper, the New York Times.
Eventually, people started to wonder if someone was secretly giving Hans clues.
So one day they asked Wilhelm to leave the room.
Hans still got all the answers right.
Eventually, everyone had to agree.
Hans was a clever customer.
Only one scientist sniffed out something fishy.
He realized that everyone who asked Hans questions knew whether the answers were "yes" or "no."
He began to wonder what would happen if the person asking the questions didn't know the answers.
When he tried it, Hans failed one test after another.
Hans and Wilhelm were not happy about this and were apparently both very upset.
Soon enough, the cat was out of the bag: Clever Hans only knew the answer if the person asking the question knew it.
But how on earth did Hans get the clues?
The scientist scratched his head.
Eventually, he unraveled the secret.
No one had given Hans secret clues.
He had sniffed them out himself by paying very close attention.
People who knew the answers inadvertently gave it away through their body language.
Sometimes they held their breath, raised an eyebrow, touched their nose, or blinked their eyes faster while asking the question.
Hans learned to interpret their body language correctly and then knew whether to nod his head or tap his paw.
Clever Hans was indeed clever... in a completely different way!
Today, scientists still keep in mind the lesson that Clever Hans taught them when conducting research with animals.
They make sure not to give away unknowing clues, among other things, by wearing dark glasses.
